feat: merging native get started (#4538)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/native/native-get-started.md

[//]: # (title: Get started with Kotlin/Native)

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create a Kotlin/Native application.

With Kotlin/Native, you can compile for [different targets](native-target-support.md), including Linux, macOS, and Windows.
While cross-platform compilation is possible, which means using one platform to compile for a different one,
in this case, you'll be targeting the same platform you're compiling on.

There are several options for getting started with Kotlin/Native:

> * The easiest way to visualize the project creation is to [use an IDE](#in-ide).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The easiest and most visual way to create a project is by [using an IDE](#in-ide).
```
Visualizing project creation sounds a bit strange to me. I wasn't sure whether you meant being able to explore the project in a visual way or literally that it's a way of creating a project through a UI. I tried to suggest an alternative that sounds more natural. WDYT?

> * If you want to get a better understanding of how things work under the hood, [create build files for the project manually](#using-gradle).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To better understand how things work under the hood, [create build files for the project manually](#using-gradle).
```
WDYT about making this more concise?

  
  The default choice for Kotlin/Native and Kotlin Multiplatform is the [Gradle](https://gradle.org) build system,
  commonly used in Java, Android, and other ecosystems.

* You can also use the Kotlin/Native compiler (which is shipped as a part of the standard Kotlin distribution)
  [directly in the command line tool](#using-the-command-line-compiler).

>   While console compilation seems easy and clear, it doesn't scale well for larger projects with hundreds of files and
>   libraries. For such projects, it's recommended to use an IDE or a build system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Console compilation may seem easy and straightforward, but it doesn't scale well for larger projects with hundreds of files and
  libraries. For such projects, it's recommended to use an IDE or a build system.
```
WDYT about "we recommend" rather than "it's recommended"?

> If you use a Mac and want to create and run applications for macOS or other Apple targets, you also need to
> install [Xcode Command Line Tools](https://developer.apple.com/download/), launch it, and accept the license terms first.
>
{style="note"}

## In IDE

In this section, you'll learn how to use IntelliJ IDEA to create a Kotlin/Native application. You can use both
the Community Edition and the Ultimate Edition.

### Create the project

> 1. Download and install the latest version of [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) with the latest [Kotlin plugin](releases.md).

Reviewer: Since the plugin is now bundled in IntelliJ IDEA, should we not mention it anymore? 🤔

Author: True, forgot about that. thanks!

2. Clone the [project template](https://github.com/Kotlin/kmp-native-wizard)

>    by selecting **File** | **New** | **Project from Version Control** in IntelliJ IDEA and using this URL link:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   by selecting **File** | **New** | **Project from Version Control** in IntelliJ IDEA and using this URL:
```

   ```none
   https://github.com/Kotlin/kmp-native-wizard
   ```   

> 3. Open the `gradle/libs.versions.toml` file, the version catalog of project dependencies. To create Kotlin/Native

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open the `gradle/libs.versions.toml` file, which is the version catalog for project dependencies. To create Kotlin/Native
```

> 

Reviewer: WDYT about changing the future tense on lines 69 and 73 (from the modified file) to present tense as well?

   }
   ```

4. Run the application.
5. Enter your name and enjoy the result:

   ![Application output](native-output-gutter-2.png){width=422}

Now let's count only the unique letters in your name:

1. In the `Main.kt` file, declare the new [extension function](extensions.md#extension-functions)

>    `countDistinctCharacters()` for `String`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `.countDistinctCharacters()` for `String`:
```

   fun String.countDistinctCharacters() = lowercase().toList().distinct().count()
   ```

> 2. Use the `countDistinctCharacters()` function to count the unique letters in your name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use the `.countDistinctCharacters()` function to count the unique letters in your name:
```

   }
   ```

3. Run the application.
4. Enter your name and see the result:

   ![Application output](native-output-gutter-3.png){width=422}

## Using Gradle

In this section, you'll learn how to manually create a Kotlin/Native application using Gradle.

### Create project files

> 1. To get started, install the compatible version of [Gradle](https://gradle.org/install/). See the [compatibility table](gradle-configure-project.md#apply-the-plugin)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To get started, install a compatible version of [Gradle](https://gradle.org/install/). See the [compatibility table](gradle-configure-project.md#apply-the-plugin)
```

   to check the Kotlin Gradle plugin (KGP) compatibility with available Gradle versions.

> 2. Create an empty project directory. Inside it, create the `build.gradle(.kts)` Gradle build file with the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create an empty project directory. Inside it, create a `build.gradle(.kts)` file with the following
```
Makes it less repetitive. WDYT?

   content:

   <tabs group="build-script">
   <tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

   ```kotlin
   // build.gradle.kts
   plugins {
       kotlin("multiplatform") version "%kotlinVersion%"
   }

   repositories {
       mavenCentral()
   }

   kotlin {
       macosArm64("native") {  // on macOS
       // linuxArm64("native") // on Linux
       // mingwX64("native")   // on Windows
           binaries {
               executable()
           }
       }
   }

   tasks.withType<Wrapper> {
       gradleVersion = "%gradleVersion%"
       distributionType = Wrapper.DistributionType.BIN
   }
   ```

   </tab>
   <tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

   ```groovy
   // build.gradle
   plugins {
       id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.multiplatform' version '%kotlinVersion%'
   }

   repositories {
       mavenCentral()
   }

   kotlin {
       macosArm64('native') {  // on macOS
       // linuxArm64('native') // on Linux
       // mingwX64('native')   // on Windows
           binaries {
               executable()
           }
       }
   }

   wrapper {
       gradleVersion = '%gradleVersion%'
       distributionType = 'BIN'
   }
   ```

   </tab>
   </tabs>

>    You can use different [target presets](native-target-support.md), such as `macosArm64`, `iosArm64` `linuxArm64`,

Reviewer: Should we remove any mention of "presets" since we removed the "Set up targets for Kotlin Multiplatform" page?

Author: Oh yeah, that's a good idea, rewrote the whole paragraph

   and `mingwX64` to define the target platform. The preset name describes a platform for which you are compiling your code.
   These target presets optionally take the target name as a parameter, which in this case is `native`.
   The target name is used to generate the source paths and task names in the project.

3. Create an empty `settings.gradle(.kts)` file in the project directory.

> 4. Create a directory `src/nativeMain/kotlin` and place inside it the `hello.kt` file with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create a `src/nativeMain/kotlin` directory and place a `hello.kt` file inside it with the following content:
```

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
       println("Hello, Kotlin/Native!")
   }
   ```

By convention, all sources are located in the `src/<target name>[Main|Test]/kotlin` directories, where `Main` is for the
source code and `Test` is for tests. `<target name>` corresponds to the target platform (in this case, `native`),
as specified in the build file.

### Build and run the project

1. From the root project directory, run the build command:

   ```bash
   ./gradlew nativeBinaries
   ```

   This command creates the `build/bin/native` directory with two directories inside: `debugExecutable` and

>    `releaseExecutable`. They contain corresponding binary files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `releaseExecutable`. They contain the corresponding binary files.
```

   By default, the name of the binary file is the same as the project directory.

2. To run the project, execute the following command:

   ```bash
   build/bin/native/debugExecutable/<project_name>.kexe
   ```

> Terminal prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The terminal prints "Hello, Kotlin/Native!".
```

### Open the project in IDE

Now, you can open your project in any IDE that supports Gradle. If you use IntelliJ IDEA:

1. Select **File** | **Open**.
2. Select the project directory and click **Open**.

>    IntelliJ IDEA will automatically detect it as a Kotlin/Native project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   IntelliJ IDEA automatically detects if it's a Kotlin/Native project.
```
Changing to present tense.

If you encounter a problem with the project, IntelliJ IDEA displays the error message in the **Build** tab.

## Using the command-line compiler

In this section, you'll learn how to create a Kotlin/Native application using the Kotlin compiler in the command line tool.

### Download and install the compiler

To install the compiler:

1. Go to the Kotlin's [GitHub releases](%kotlinLatestUrl%) page.

> 2. Look for a file with `kotlin-native` in the name and download one that is suitable for your operating system.

Reviewer: What about giving an example file name here?

3. Unpack the archive to a directory of your choice.
4. Open your shell profile and add the path to the compiler's `/bin` directory to the `PATH` environment variable: 

   ```bash
   export PATH="/<path to the complier>/kotlin-native/bin:$PATH"
   ```

> Although the compiler output has no dependencies or virtual machine requirements, the compiler itself
> requires Java 1.8 or higher runtime. It's supported
> by [JDK 8 (JAVA SE 8) or later versions](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/).
>
{style="note"}

### Create the program

Choose a working directory and create a file named `hello.kt`. Update it with the following code:

```kotlin
fun main() {
    println("Hello, Kotlin/Native!")
}
```

### Compile the code from the console

To compile the application, execute the following command with the downloaded compiler:

```bash
kotlinc-native hello.kt -o hello
```

> The value of `-o` option specifies the name of the output file, so this call generates the `hello.kexe` binary file on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of the `-o` option specifies the name of the output file, so this call generates the `hello.kexe` binary file on
```
